23-02-2007-Derailment-at-Grayrigg

Accident:On 23 February 2007 at 20:12 hrs, an express passenger train derailed
All nine vehicles of the Class 390 Pendolino unit derailed (Figure 2). Eight of the vehicles
subsequently fell down an embankment and five turned onto their sides.

Work enviroment:It was dark at the time, and the driver of the train was unable to see anything untoward
before the accident.

EQ/Hardware: 
1:The fasteners in the third permanent way stretcher bar joint failed by unwinding. This
occurs when the applied load exceeds the clamping force on the joint.

2:The left-hand switch rail was found in a partially open position with no connections
between it and the right-hand switch rail, because all of the stretcher bar assemblies had
failed.

3:The second permanent way stretcher bar was missing from the points.
4:The third permanent way stretcher bar was found in place but broken in two places.
5:The accident at Grayrigg was due to sequential failures of the permanent way and lock
stretcher bar assemblies at 2B points allowing the left-hand switch rail to move to an
unsafe position.


Communication: 
1:The train crew, passengers, and local residents called the emergency services.
2:Notes from the meeting confirm that all
work was considered complete; no-one present identified the omitted section of inspection
H, which included 2B points. The track section manager was not rostered to be in work
on that day, but was present at this meeting, although he did not participate fully as he
was simultaneously preparing for a staff briefing that afternoon.




Supervision-Management:
1:A supervisor carrying out a scheduled basic visual inspection of the track on Sunday
18 February 2007 did not include 2B points. He had originally only intended to carry out
a supervisory inspection, but then agreed, on 12 February 2007.

MM 2:Four bolts and four nuts (all ¾ inch Whitworth) and two single coil spring washers were
found in close proximity to the third permanent way stretcher bar. All of the bolts
exhibited signs of damage consistent with being loosely held within the switch rail holes
prior to working free.

3:On 19 February 2007, the ‘plan-do-review’ meeting did not recognise that there was an
omission in the length of the inspection, and this meant that no action to reinstate the
inspection was taken.


WorklOAD:During the week he forgot that he had agreed to extend his inspection
to cover the extra length. As a result, the opportunity for a basic visual inspection to
discover the degraded points, and for remedial action to be taken was lost.

Design:The construction of 2B points at Lambrigg was to a standard design.

Personal:The driver recalled that the train ‘leapt in the air’ as it derailed. He was unable to react
before the motion of the derailed train propelled him out of his seat.

procedure: As a result of the damage and disruption to the signalling system, all signals in the
immediate vicinity on both lines automatically reverted to danger and approaching trains
were stopped before they reached the site of the accident.
