7-09-2015-derailment-at-Knaresborough

Housekeeping : the resident signaller for the morning shift (resident signaller B) reported an intermittent 
indication fault on points 3 in the signal box.Unable to recreate the fault, they replaced 
the lamps in the indicators for points 3 in the signal box, as a precaution.


Personal:one of the resident signallers (referred to as resident signaller A) in Knaresborough signal box hurt his 
back when pulling the mechanical lever controlling points 5.Having reported the injury to his line management, 
he completed his shift on the basis that points 5 did not need to be used again.
 He was due to work the following day but called in sick because of his bad back.


Communication:
1:the Harrogate LOM called the Knottingley MOM to discuss the upcoming work as a points operator that 
the Knottingley MOM was scheduled to undertake on the Saturday morning at Harrogate5. During the discussion, 
the Harrogate LOM mentioned that he was struggling to find someone to operate Knaresborough signal box at the same time. 
The Knottingley MOM, knowing tha he was still certified as being competent to operate the signal box, offered to 
cover the shift at Knaresborough.

2:the signaller (MOM) received a call from the driver of train 2C07 which by now had stopped at signal K10 at danger.
 The signaller (MOM) explained that he had pulled the levers in the wrong order and asked the driver to wait.


Training:
1:the signaller (MOM) pulled signal levers K9-K8-K10 in this order, expecting all three signals to clear, 
but signal K10 did not.
2: The signaller (MOM) did not realise that the points were not set in either the normal or reverse position 
and interpreted his ability to reverse the signal lever as proof that the route was correctly set and safe.
3:The signaller (MOM) did not check the indication on points 3. Had he checked the indication, he would have
discovered that neither the normal nor reverse lamp for points 3 was illuminated, indicating that the points 
were not correctly set. Signal K10 did not clear because of a points failure, and for no other reason.

Unsafe condition:
 1:the signals at Knaresborough signal box need to be pulled in a specific order for them to clear 
(K10-K9-K8), he replaced all three levers. This action meant that there was then a two-minute period during 
which signals K9 and K10 could not be operated.

2:signal K10 remained at danger and the corresponding signal aspect indicator in the signal box 
continued to display a red light

3:the train was travelling at approximately 18 mph (29 km/h) as it passed over the points.(is in excess of the 
15 mph (25 km/h) limit that applies when driving over points after having been authorised to pass a signal at danger)

Procedure:the signaller (MOM) pulled the signal levers in the sequence K10-K9-K8 fully expecting signal K10 to clear
 this time.

Authority:Unable to identify anything that would explain why signal K10 remained at danger, he concluded that there must
 have been something wrong with the signal and decided to authorise the driver to pass the signal at danger.

Supervision-Management:The signaller (MOM) asked the driver to proceed at caution 
but did not ask him to examine the line to specifically look for a hazard.

Hardware/equipment :The switch rails of points 3A were not set in either the normal or reverse position, 
most likely because of high friction at the baseplate to switch rail interfaces.

Maintainance Management:The lack of adherence to the lubrication application guidelines, combined with the poor 
installed geometry of the points, resulted in higher than expected friction.
Accident:
At 07:22 hrs, as it was travelling over points 3A, train 2C07 derailed.

